---
title: 617. Merge Two Binary Trees
date: 2020-04-21
tags:
  - trees
categories:
  - Leetcode
---

[View Problem Here](https://leetcode.com/problems/merge-two-binary-trees/)

This is my first tree Leetcode problem. For this problem, some of the main difficulties I see myself having are trying to figure out how to traverse a tree as this was something which I found difficult to apply with linked lists when I first started using them.

One thing I must consider is how to go back up a tree when I have reached the leaf node. This data structure differs to linked lists because there is more than one direction to take now.

My approach for this problem will be as follows:

- Traverse both trees
- While these trees are not null:
  - if not null: sum
  - if null: make value = value which is sum

After spending about an hour trying to figure this out, I took a look at some other people's solutions on Leetcode. One way of approaching this problem was to use recursion to traverse the trees. My solution below uses recursion in this way.

**My Solution**

```java
/**
 * Definition for a binary tree node.
 * public class TreeNode {
 *     int val;
 *     TreeNode left;
 *     TreeNode right;
 *     TreeNode() {}
 *     TreeNode(int val) { this.val = val; }
 *     TreeNode(int val, TreeNode left, TreeNode right) {
 *         this.val = val;
 *         this.left = left;
 *         this.right = right;
 *     }
 * }
 */
class Solution {
    public TreeNode mergeTrees(TreeNode root1, TreeNode root2) {
        if (root1 == null && root2 == null) return null;
        else if (root1 == null) return root2;
        else if (root2 == null) return root1;
        TreeNode new_node = new TreeNode(root1.val + root2.val);
        new_node.left = mergeTrees(root1.left, root2.left);
        new_node.right = mergeTrees(root1.right, root2.right);
        return new_node;
    }
}
```

The above solution first checks if both nodes are null and if they are it returns null. It then checks both individually and if they are null it returns the other node.

After ensuring that neither of the nodes are null, we create a new node. This node's value will be the sum of the values of both of the current nodes. We then create new left and right nodes for this new node and they will encompass either the left or right nodes of the current nodes.

After viewing the solutions for this problem, I gained a better understanding of how recursion would be an effective approach here. I originally tried to tackle the problem iteratively but I struggled to understand how to effectively traverse the tree iteratively.
